doc: upgrade docs/life_of_a_godwoken_transaction.md to v1.1 (#697)
nervosnetwork/godwoken: docs/life_of_a_godwoken_transaction.md

# Rollup Layer 2 Chain

> Fundamentally, Godwoken is a layer 2 solution for layer 1 Nervos CKB blockchain. [Here](https://pudge.explorer.nervos.org/address/ckt1qpuljza4azfdsrwjzdpea6442yfqadqhv7yzfu5zknlmtusm45hpuqgqcfn63wfumts4lvrryhc35u43q3aaf5euqq6zeas9) shows one deployment of Godwoken on CKB's testnet. New layer 2 Godwoken blocks are submitted to layer 1 CKB in **block submission transactions**. The current state of the layer 2 Godwoken blockchain is committed in the cell data part of the CKB cell generated by the block submission transaction. [This transaction](https://pudge.explorer.nervos.org/transaction/0x9fd03b09d27326aa54dc53e11d7f7c01f27e570bdc645233b91664323cac0568) is an example of a block submission transaction. The chain state, as of this layer 2 block, is:

Reviewer: Godwoken is fundamentally a layer 2 solution for layer 1, the Nervos CKB blockchain. [Here](https://pudge.explorer.nervos.org/address/ckt1qpuljza4azfdsrwjzdpea6442yfqadqhv7yzfu5zknlmtusm45hpuqgqcfn63wfumts4lvrryhc35u43q3aaf5euqq6zeas9) is an example of a Godwoken deployment on the CKB testnet. New layer 2 blocks are submitted to layer 1 in **block submission transactions**. The current state of the Godwoken blockchain is committed in the cell data of the CKB cells generated by the block submission transactions. [This transaction](https://pudge.explorer.nervos.org/transaction/0x9fd03b09d27326aa54dc53e11d7f7c01f27e570bdc645233b91664323cac0568) represents an example of a block submission transaction. The chain state of this layer 2 block is as follows:

> Fundamentally, Godwoken is a layer 2 solution for layer 1 Nervos CKB blockchain. [Here](https://pudge.explorer.nervos.org/address/ckt1qpuljza4azfdsrwjzdpea6442yfqadqhv7yzfu5zknlmtusm45hpuqgqcfn63wfumts4lvrryhc35u43q3aaf5euqq6zeas9) shows one deployment of Godwoken on CKB's testnet. A new layer 2 Godwoken block, packed in a layer 1 CKB transaction, is issued to CKB's network periodically. The current state of the layer 2 Godwoken blockchain is committed in the cell data part of a single CKB cell. [This layer 1 CKB transaction](https://pudge.explorer.nervos.org/transaction/0x9fd03b09d27326aa54dc53e11d7f7c01f27e570bdc645233b91664323cac0568) serves as an example of the layer 2 Godwoken block. The chain state, as of this layer 2 block, is stored in the cell data part of the first output cell in this transaction:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Fundamentally, Godwoken is a layer 2 solution for layer 1 Nervos CKB blockchain. [Here](https://pudge.explorer.nervos.org/address/ckt1qpuljza4azfdsrwjzdpea6442yfqadqhv7yzfu5zknlmtusm45hpuqgqcfn63wfumts4lvrryhc35u43q3aaf5euqq6zeas9) shows one deployment of Godwoken on CKB's testnet. New layer 2 Godwoken blocks are submitted to layer 1 CKB in **block submission transactions**. The current state of the layer 2 Godwoken blockchain is committed in the cell data part of the CKB cell generated by the block submission transaction. [This transaction](https://pudge.explorer.nervos.org/transaction/0x9fd03b09d27326aa54dc53e11d7f7c01f27e570bdc645233b91664323cac0568) is an example of a block submission transaction. The chain state, as of this layer 2 block, is:
```

```json
0xa0cf6037bfc238b179b74a30a9b12e15a4fbdd8881aebc8e5a66a8b5b5c95f0a4ca62a4c652697c96b7e02eea3a1bc21c5369bcb30626b9aee1cbb1babea11ff4f16000055a255f47f22b6f8ed1a025f971d60528f5407b7c71745c8c493a51a631bb4bfab6f000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000047ee34be61c51e026838c5348ab0ca3566eed50dc9b3dc676fe16a7f7d72f80fcfe4f3d680010000466f0000000000000001
```

This is actually a `GlobalState` data structure serialized in [molecule](https://github.com/nervosnetwork/molecule)'s format:

```
struct GlobalState {
    rollup_config_hash: Byte32,
    account: AccountMerkleState,
    block: BlockMerkleState,
    reverted_block_root: Byte32,
    tip_block_hash: Byte32,
    tip_block_timestamp: Uint64,
    last_finalized_block_number: Uint64,
    // 0: running, 1: halting
    status: byte,
    version: byte,
}
```

Please refer to [this file](https://github.com/nervosnetwork/godwoken/blob/v1.1.0-beta/crates/types/schemas/godwoken.mol) for more definitions.

> The actual layer 2 Godwoken block, is also contained in the layer 1 CKB transaction. The first witness of the above mentioned transaction, contains the following data:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The actual layer 2 Godwoken block, is also contained in the block submission transaction. The first witness of the above mentioned transaction, contains the following data:
```

> The actual layer 2 Godwoken block, is also contained in the block submission transaction. The first witness of the above mentioned transaction, contains the following data:

Reviewer: The block submission transaction also contains the actual layer 2 block. The first witness of the transaction contains the following data:

```

> This is actually a `WitnessArgs` data structure described [here](https://github.com/nervosnetwork/godwoken/blob/v1.1.0-beta/crates/types/schemas/blockchain.mol#L116), and serialized in [molecule](https://github.com/nervosnetwork/molecule)'s format. In the `output_type` field of WitnessArgs, the actual `L2Block` data structure is stored, also serialized in molecule's format:

Reviewer: The [WitnessArgs](https://github.com/nervosnetwork/godwoken/blob/v1.1.0-beta/crates/types/schemas/blockchain.mol#L116) data structure is serialized in the molecule format. In the `output_type` field of `WitnessArgs`, the actual `L2Block` data structure is stored and serialized in the molecule format:

* A 256-bit key-value storage is provided to applications running on Godwoken.
* Conceptually, Godwoken provides a sequential model: each layer 2 transaction is applied to the Godwoken storage in sequence. Smart contracts in layer 2 transactions are free to read from and write into the storage space.

> One might wonder where all the data are stored given constant storage requirement in the above transactions. Godwoken leverages [Sparse Merkle Tree](https://medium.com/@kelvinfichter/whats-a-sparse-merkle-tree-acda70aeb837) to build the storage space. Only the root hash of the Sparse Merkle Tree(SMT) is kept in the rollup cell. State validator validates that the sparse merkle tree is correctly updated in each layer 2 block. We actually took a step further here, and build an optimized SMT, which can save a lot of space and calculation for CKB's use case. Please refer to [here](https://github.com/nervosnetwork/sparse-merkle-tree) for more details.

Reviewer: Considering the constant storage requirements of the above transactions, you may wonder where all the data is stored. Godwoken leverages [Sparse Merkle Tree](https://medium.com/@kelvinfichter/whats-a-sparse-merkle-tree-acda70aeb837) to build the storage space. The rollup cell only contains the root hash of the Sparse Merkle Tree (SMT). The state validator verifies that the sparse merkle tree is correctly updated in each layer 2 block. We have actually gone one step further here, and built an optimized SMT, which will save CKB a great deal of space and calculation. For more details, see [here](https://github.com/nervosnetwork/sparse-merkle-tree).

## Optimistic Rollup

> The following workflow is used by Godwoken:

Reviewer: Godwoken uses the following workflow:

In this design, an aggregator bears liquidity costs for staking CKBs, as well as layer 1 transaction fees for the layer 1 transactions containing layer 2 block. In exchange, the aggregator can charge layer 2 transaction fees from layer 2 users. As explained below, layer 2 transaction fees can be paid either in CKB or in any kind of [sUDT](https://github.com/nervosnetwork/rfcs/blob/master/rfcs/0025-simple-udt/0025-simple-udt.md). In fact, Godwoken treat CKB and sUDTs as exactly the same thing in layer 2.

> ## Multiple block producers

Reviewer: Multiple Block Producers

> Godwoken is designed based on the assumption that anyone shall be able to propose layer2 blocks. But in the current deployment, Godwoken has only one block producer to sequence transactions and propose new blocks. To support multiple block producers (or sequencers) is still an open question for different rollups. In the future, we may introduce a consensus through upgrading to support multiple block producer coordination.

Reviewer: Godwoken was designed assuming anyone can propose layer 2 blocks. However, in the current deployment, Godwoken only has one block producer to sequence transactions and propose new blocks. Support for multiple block producers (or sequencers) is still an open question for different rollups. In the future, we may introduce a consensus through an upgrade to support multiple block producers.

# Actions

In this sections we will explain all the actions one can perform on Godwoken, together with technical details related to each action.

## Deposit

> To use Godwoken, one must first deposit some tokens(either CKB or sUDTs) from layer 1 to layer 2. This is named as a **deposit** action. A deposit action is represented as a layer 1 CKB transaction, it must create a special output cell named a **deposit cell**. [Here](https://pudge.explorer.nervos.org/transaction/0xb3aceeb1d84ea5b24e4b8fe339fc6e7814f1e58ebc99237068f22a6924501a1e) is an example of a deposit action. This transaction deposits 10000 CKB to Godwoken. What is relavant here, is the lock script of output cell #0:

Reviewer 2: Is it tokens or assets (used in the deposit and withdrawal doc)? Shall we consolidate on one term?

Author: Tokens and assets are both used wildly in blockchain products, I think it is ok to mix use the two words.

> To use Godwoken, one must first deposit some tokens(either CKB or sUDTs) from layer 1 to layer 2. This is named as a **deposit** action. A deposit action is represented as a layer 1 CKB transaction, it must create a special output cell named a **deposit cell**. [Here](https://pudge.explorer.nervos.org/transaction/0xb3aceeb1d84ea5b24e4b8fe339fc6e7814f1e58ebc99237068f22a6924501a1e) is an example of a deposit action. This transaction deposits 10000 CKB to Godwoken. What is relavant here, is the lock script of output cell #0:

Reviewer: In order to use Godwoken, you will be required to deposit some tokens, CKB or sUDT, from layer 1 to layer 2. This is known as a **deposit** action. A deposit action is represented as a layer 1 transaction. It must create a special output cell called a **deposit cell**. [Here](https://pudge.explorer.nervos.org/transaction/0xb3aceeb1d84ea5b24e4b8fe339fc6e7814f1e58ebc99237068f22a6924501a1e) is an example of a deposit action. This transaction deposits 10,000 CKB to Godwoken. The lock script of the output cell #0 is as follows:

```
{
    "code_hash": "0x50704b84ecb4c4b12b43c7acb260ddd69171c21b4c0ba15f3c469b7d143f6f18",
    "args": "0x702359ea7f073558921eb50d8c1c77e92f760c8f8656bde4995f26b8963e2dd8a900000014000000340000009d000000a5000000e13f4a9c1642a6c59766eb5509580808bf3917bba104a616df0d207c93050e596900000010000000300000003100000007521d0aa8e66ef441ebc31204d86bb23fc83e9edc58c19dbb1b0ebe64336ec00134000000702359ea7f073558921eb50d8c1c77e92f760c8f8656bde4995f26b8963e2dd8e8ae579256c3b84efb76bbb69cb6bcbef1375f00813a0900000000c002000000",
    "hash_type": "type"
}
```

> `code_hash` and `hash_type` is pre-determined by each Godwoken deployment. `args` contains 2 parts: the first 32 bytes of `args`, contain the **rollup type hash** of the current Godwoken deployment(remember we mentioned earlier, that rollup type hash works like a chain ID?). The second part, is the [DepositLockArgs](https://github.com/nervosnetwork/godwoken/blob/v1.1.0-beta/crates/types/schemas/godwoken.mol#L177) data structure, serialized in molecule format:

Reviewer: `code_hash` and `hash_type` are pre-determined by each Godwoken deployment. `args` contains two parts: **rollup type hash** and **DepositLockArgs**. The first 32 bytes of `args` contain the **rollup type hash** of the current Godwoken deployment, which functions as a chain ID. The [DepositLockArgs](https://github.com/nervosnetwork/godwoken/blob/v1.1.0-beta/crates/types/schemas/godwoken.mol#L177) data structure is serialized in the molecule format:

Custodian cells contain all the tokens that are managed internally in Godwoken. This [transaction](https://pudge.explorer.nervos.org/transaction/0x6c627c00d215ddc2dc21b6b40c03be8c14d4b7fca06e4d84b97e4bb526e5b135) contains a custodian cell in its output cell #2. Like a deposit cell, a custodian cell is represented by its lock script:

```
{
    "code_hash": "0x85ae4db0dd83f428a31deb342e4000af37ce2c9645d9e619df00096e3c50a2bb",
    "args": "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",
    "hash_type": "type"
}
```

> Like deposit cells, custodian cells have pre-determined `code_hash` and `hash_type` based on Godwoken deployments. The first 32 bytes in `args` contain the rollup type hash as well. What's different here, is that [CustodianLockArgs](https://github.com/nervosnetwork/godwoken/blob/v1.1.0-beta/crates/types/schemas/godwoken.mol#L188) is used instead to fill the remaining part of `args`:

Reviewer: Like deposit cells, custodian cells have pre-determined `code_hash` and `hash_type` based on Godwoken deployments. The first 32 bytes in `args` contain the rollup type hash as well. What is different here is that [CustodianLockArgs](https://github.com/nervosnetwork/godwoken/blob/v1.1.0-beta/crates/types/schemas/godwoken.mol#L188) is used to fill the remaining part of `args`:

table L2Transaction {
    raw: RawL2Transaction,
    signature: Bytes,
}
```

> Please refer to [this file](https://github.com/nervosnetwork/godwoken/blob/v1.1.0-beta/crates/types/schemas/godwoken.mol#L69-L81) for a more complete definition and related types.

Reviewer: The full definition and related types can be found in [this file](https://github.com/nervosnetwork/godwoken/blob/v1.1.0-beta/crates/types/schemas/godwoken.mol#L69-L81).

}
```

> This is in fact the JSON representation of the above `L2Transaction` data structure. `args` contains a variable length, free formatted transaction argument data that is interpreted depending on the values of `to_id`. For this particular example, `args` contains [SUDTTransfer](https://github.com/nervosnetwork/godwoken/blob/v1.1.0-beta/crates/types/schemas/godwoken.mol#L260) data structure in molecule serialization format:

Reviewer: This is the JSON representation of the `L2Transaction` data structure. `args` contains a variable length, free formatted transaction argument data that is interpreted depending on the values of `to_id`. In this particular example, `args` contains the [SUDTTransfer](https://github.com/nervosnetwork/godwoken/blob/v1.1.0-beta/crates/types/schemas/godwoken.mol#L260) data structure in the molecule serialization format:

{
  "type": "SUDTTransfer",
  "value": {
      "to_address": "0x0200000014000000bb1d13450cfa630728d0390c99957c6948bf7d19",
      "amount": "0x190",
      "fee": "0x64"
  }
}
```

> In this example, we are transferring 400 shannons(denoted by `to_id` 0x1) from account 0x2(denoted by `from_id`) to account 0x0200000014000000bb1d13450cfa630728d0390c99957c6948bf7d19(denoted by `to_address` in `SUDTTransfer`), we would also love to pay for 100 shannons as layer 2 transaction fees. The next 2 sections shall explain the details for layer 2 transaction.

Reviewer: In this example, we are transferring 400 shannons (denoted by `to_id` 0x1) from account 0x2 (denoted by `from_id`) to account 0x0200000014000000bb1d13450cfa630728d0390c99957c6948bf7d19 (denoted by `to_address` in `SUDTTransfer`). In addition, we would like to pay 100 shannons as layer 2 transaction fees. The following two sections will discuss layer 2 transactions in more detail.

* Using `from_id` in the layer 2 transaction, Godwoken locates the corresponding layer 2 lock script
* The layer 2 lock script is executed to validate the layer 2 transaction

> There is one quirk to the above flow here: recall that current Godwoken uses optimistic rollup design. Due to the "optimistic" nature, the layer 2 lock script is not typically executed on chain. It is only executed in the case that a challenger starts a challenge request on chain, and an aggregator proves the validity of the layer 2 transaction via a cancel challenge request. Hence the way to build a layer 2 lock script, is also slightly different here. An example for such a script, can be found [here](https://github.com/nervosnetwork/godwoken-scripts/blob/master/contracts/eth-account-lock/src/entry.rs#L24).

Reviewer: The above flow has one quirk: the current version of Godwoken uses optimistic rollup design. Due to the "optimistic" nature, the layer 2 lock script is not typically executed on chain. It is only executed when a challenger initiates a challenge request on chain, and an aggregator validates the validity of the layer 2 transaction through a cancel challenge request. Hence the way to build a layer 2 lock script is also slightly different. An example of such a script can be found [here](https://github.com/nervosnetwork/godwoken-scripts/blob/master/contracts/eth-account-lock/src/entry.rs#L24).

Ethereum developers would recognize that this design resembles a lot like EOA vs contract account in Ethereum, which is true since Godwoken is inspired from Ethereum here.

> While a typical user account is a balance owned by a user, contract account, on the other hand, provides a storage for an on-chain smart contract. Similar to the way that a user account is created from a general lock script with a user's public key hash, a smart contract for a contract account is created from a **backend** with some special script args. The smart contract is also represented using the unified [Script](https://github.com/nervosnetwork/godwoken/blob/v1.1.0-beta/crates/types/schemas/blockchain.mol#L32) data structure in the Nervos ecosystem: the combination of `code_hash` and `hash_type` in a script identifies the backend, while `args` provide contract account specific arguments.

Reviewer: While a typical user account is a balance owned by a user, a contract account, on the other hand, provides storage for an on-chain smart contract. As a user account is generated from a general lock script with a user's public key hash, a smart contract for a contract account is generated from a **backend** with some special script args. In the Nervos ecosystem, smart contracts are also represented using the unified [Script](https://github.com/nervosnetwork/godwoken/blob/v1.1.0-beta/crates/types/schemas/blockchain.mol#L32) data structure: the combination of `code_hash` and `hash_type` in a script identifies the backend, while `args` provides specific contract account arguments.

Reviewer 3: A typical user account is a balance owned by the user, while a contract account provides storage for the on-chain smart contracts. The user account is generated from a general lock script with a user's public key hash, while the smart contract for the contract account is generated from a **backend** with some special script args.

}
```

> The `args` part in this transaction, contains a [MetaContractArgs](https://github.com/nervosnetwork/godwoken/blob/v1.1.0-beta/crates/types/schemas/godwoken.mol#L232) data structure serialized in molecule format. A JSON representation for the `args`, is as follows:

Reviewer: The `args` part of this transaction contains a [MetaContractArgs](https://github.com/nervosnetwork/godwoken/blob/v1.1.0-beta/crates/types/schemas/godwoken.mol#L232) data structure serialized in the molecule format. A JSON representation of the `args` is as follows:

```
struct RawWithdrawalRequest {
    nonce: Uint32,
    // chain id
    chain_id: Uint64,
    // CKB amount
    capacity: Uint64,
    // SUDT amount
    amount: Uint128,
    sudt_script_hash: Byte32,
    // layer2 account_script_hash
    account_script_hash: Byte32,
    // withdrawal registry ID
    registry_id: Uint32,
    // layer1 lock to withdraw after challenge period
    owner_lock_hash: Byte32,
    // withdrawal fee, paid to block producer
    fee: Uint128,
}

vector WithdrawalRequestVec <WithdrawalRequest>;

struct WithdrawalRequest {
    raw: RawWithdrawalRequest,
    signature: Bytes,
}
```

> Please refer to [this file](https://github.com/nervosnetwork/godwoken/blob/v1.1.0-beta/crates/types/schemas/godwoken.mol#L136-L160) for a more complete definition and related types.

Reviewer: The full definition and related types can be found in [this file](https://github.com/nervosnetwork/godwoken/blob/v1.1.0-beta/crates/types/schemas/godwoken.mol#L136-L160).

{
  "raw": {
    "nonce": "0x3",

>     "chain_id": "0x0",

Reviewer 4: consider filling this value with the CHAIN_ID of Godwoken testnet_v1?
